README.md, before:

# sveddy

Sveddy is an in-database ML system for PostgreSQL implementing collaborative filtering algorithms. Unlike any other open-source solution, Sveddy supports continuous learning. This means that when a user expresses their preferences, such as by rating an item, those preferences are immediately taken into account without requiring a full model re-train.

## Example Usage

```sql
-- Fill in pre-existing data
CREATE TABLE ratings (
    user_id integer,
    movie_id integer,
    rating integer
);
INSERT INTO ratings (user_id, movie_id, rating) VALUES
-- User 1 likes movies 1 and 2 but not 3 and 4
(1, 1, 5),
(1, 2, 5),
(1, 3, 1),
(1, 4, 2),
-- User 2 likes movies 3 and 4 but not 1 and 2
(2, 1, 1),
(2, 2, 2),
(2, 3, 5),
(2, 4, 5),
-- User 3 likes movie 1. What can we predict about their preferences?
(3, 1, 5);

-- Initialize sveddy and create a UV decomposition model
CREATE EXTENSION sveddy;
CALL initialize_model_uv(
    'ratings',
    'user_id',
    'movie_id',
    'rating',
    -- A choice of the hyperparameter k = 2 will work best for this very simple data.
    -- For most cases, k should be higher, typically 5-15, depending on the amount of data.
    2
);
CALL train_uv('ratings');

-- Make a prediction about user 3's rating on movie 4
-- With the UV model, this is internally a dot product between user 3's weights and movie 4's weights
SELECT predict_uv(
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u WHERE id = 3),
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v WHERE id = 4)
);
```

## Building & Installation

### Linux
1. `git clone https://github.com/RobbieGM/sveddy.git && cd sveddy`
2. `make`
    - Use `make SSE=no` if your CPU does not support [SSE3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streaming_SIMD_Extensions).
3. Optionally: `make installcheck` to verify tests pass in your environment
4. `make install` to copy Sveddy into PostgreSQL
    - If using NixOS, instead run `nix-shell` to build an environment with a version of PostgreSQL that has Sveddy installed, and then run the modified postgresql server with `postgres`.
5. Run `CREATE EXTENSION sveddy` in your database and you should be good to go!

## Documentation

### `initialize_model_uv`
`initialize_model_uv(source_table name, user_column name, item_column name, rating_column name, k integer, regularization_factor real DEFAULT 0.05)`
Creates a new Sveddy UV model. A UV model works by calculating a low-rank matrix approximation of the source table via UV decomposition. This is very similar to a truncated SVD (singular value decomposition). Because Sveddy will sometimes try to query entries from `source_table` by user id or item id, it's recommended to create indices on the source table for both the `user_column` and `item_column`. This function creates two new tables: a U table, representing user preferences, and a V table, representing item qualities. The U table will have the name `source_table + "_sveddy_model_u"` and the V table will have the name `source_table + "_sveddy_model_v"`. These tables will contain the weights necessary for the low-rank matrix approximation of ratings in the source table. They are initialized with the necessary ids but with random weights. This procedure does not train the model yet; see `train_uv` for more.

Parameters:
- `source_table` The table containing the data to train from. 
- `user_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the user id. The column must be of type `integer` (`int32`).
- `item_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the item id. The column must be of type `integer` (`int32`).
- `rating_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the value to be predicted (e.g. rating out of 5 stars, watch time, +1 for like or -1 for dislike, etc.). This column must have a numeric type.
- `k` The rank of the low-rank matrix approximation. A higher rank allows the model to learn more about the data at the risk of overfitting. In general, the more data you have, the higher you can safely set k.
- `regularization_factor` The weight magnitude penalty in the U and V tables. Increasing this parameter may help reduce model overfitting. When set too high, the model will make predictions much closer to 0 than desired.

Example:
```sql
CALL initialize_model_uv('ratings', 'user_id', 'movie_id', 'rating', 5, 0.1);
```

### `garbage_collect_uv`
`garbage_collect_uv(source_table name)`
Removes rows in the U and V tables that do not correspond to user or item ids in the source table. For example, if a user deletes their account, their preferences are still saved in the U table. This function removes orphaned rows to save space.
Parameters:
- `source_table` the source table of the model to garbage collect.

Example:
```sql
CALL garbage_collect_uv('ratings');
```

### `train_uv`
`train_uv(source_table name, patience smallint DEFAULT 4, max_iterations smallint DEFAULT 8, quiet boolean DEFAULT false)`
Trains the UV model for the source table whose name is given by the first parameter. This will periodically report training RMSE. The current implementation of `train_uv` requires slightly over `4*((k*k+k)*max(# users, # items))` bytes of memory to function. If the model's k hyperparameter is set to 5 and there is 10GB of free memory, Sveddy can train on a maximum of ~80 million users or items.

Parameters:
- `source_table` Indicates the source table of the model which will be trained.
- `patience` If more than this number of training iterations pass without RMSE reaching a new low, training will stop.
- `max_iterations` The maximum number of training iterations.
- `quiet` If set to true, RMSE will not be logged.

Example:
```sql
CALL train_uv('ratings', patience => 6, max_iterations => 16);
```

### `predict_uv`
`predict_uv(user_weights real[], item_weights real[])`
Returns the model's prediction for a user on an item. The `user_weights` argument should come from the row in the U table with the id of the user in question, and similarly the `item_weights` arguments should come from the row in the V table with the id of the item in question.

Example:
```sql
SELECT predict_uv(
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u WHERE id = 3),
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v WHERE id = 5)
);
```

Example (recommend five movies to a user they haven't seen before):
```sql
SELECT items.*, predict_uv(u.weights, v.weights) AS predicted_rating
FROM (
    SELECT id, weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v
    WHERE NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM ratings 
        WHERE user_id = 3 AND movie_id = ratings_sveddy_model_v.id
    )
) AS v
CROSS JOIN (
    SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u
    WHERE id = 3
) AS u
LEFT JOIN items ON items.id = v.id
ORDER BY predicted_rating DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

Commit message:

Add training_validation_split parameter to train_uv

README.md, after:

# sveddy

Sveddy is an in-database ML system for PostgreSQL implementing collaborative filtering algorithms. Unlike any other open-source solution, Sveddy supports continuous learning. This means that when a user expresses their preferences, such as by rating an item, those preferences are immediately taken into account without requiring a full model re-train.

## Example Usage

```sql
-- Fill in pre-existing data
CREATE TABLE ratings (
    user_id integer,
    movie_id integer,
    rating integer
);
INSERT INTO ratings (user_id, movie_id, rating) VALUES
-- User 1 likes movies 1 and 2 but not 3 and 4
(1, 1, 5),
(1, 2, 5),
(1, 3, 1),
(1, 4, 2),
-- User 2 likes movies 3 and 4 but not 1 and 2
(2, 1, 1),
(2, 2, 2),
(2, 3, 5),
(2, 4, 5),
-- User 3 likes movie 1. What can we predict about their preferences?
(3, 1, 5);

-- Initialize sveddy and create a UV decomposition model
CREATE EXTENSION sveddy;
CALL initialize_model_uv(
    'ratings',
    'user_id',
    'movie_id',
    'rating',
    -- A choice of the hyperparameter k = 2 will work best for this very simple data.
    -- For most cases, k should be higher, typically 5-15, depending on the amount of data.
    2
);
CALL train_uv('ratings');

-- Make a prediction about user 3's rating on movie 4
-- With the UV model, this is internally a dot product between user 3's weights and movie 4's weights
SELECT predict_uv(
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u WHERE id = 3),
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v WHERE id = 4)
);
```

## Building & Installation

### Linux
1. `git clone https://github.com/RobbieGM/sveddy.git && cd sveddy`
2. `make`
    - Use `make SSE=no` if your CPU does not support [SSE3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streaming_SIMD_Extensions).
3. Optionally: `make installcheck` to verify tests pass in your environment
4. `make install` to copy Sveddy into PostgreSQL
    - If using NixOS, instead run `nix-shell` to build an environment with a version of PostgreSQL that has Sveddy installed, and then run the modified postgresql server with `postgres`.
5. Run `CREATE EXTENSION sveddy` in your database and you should be good to go!

## Documentation

### `initialize_model_uv`
`initialize_model_uv(source_table name, user_column name, item_column name, rating_column name, k integer, regularization_factor real DEFAULT 0.05)`
Creates a new Sveddy UV model. A UV model works by calculating a low-rank matrix approximation of the source table via UV decomposition. This is very similar to a truncated SVD (singular value decomposition). Because Sveddy will sometimes try to query entries from `source_table` by user id or item id, it's recommended to create indices on the source table for both the `user_column` and `item_column`. This function creates two new tables: a U table, representing user preferences, and a V table, representing item qualities. The U table will have the name `source_table + "_sveddy_model_u"` and the V table will have the name `source_table + "_sveddy_model_v"`. These tables will contain the weights necessary for the low-rank matrix approximation of ratings in the source table. They are initialized with the necessary ids but with random weights. This procedure does not train the model yet; see `train_uv` for more.

Parameters:
- `source_table` The table containing the data to train from. 
- `user_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the user id. The column must be of type `integer` (`int32`).
- `item_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the item id. The column must be of type `integer` (`int32`).
- `rating_column` The name of the column in the source table which holds the value to be predicted (e.g. rating out of 5 stars, watch time, +1 for like or -1 for dislike, etc.). This column must have a numeric type.
- `k` The rank of the low-rank matrix approximation. A higher rank allows the model to learn more about the data at the risk of overfitting. In general, the more data you have, the higher you can safely set k.
- `regularization_factor` The weight magnitude penalty in the U and V tables. Increasing this parameter may help reduce model overfitting. When set too high, the model will make predictions much closer to 0 than desired.

Example:
```sql
CALL initialize_model_uv('ratings', 'user_id', 'movie_id', 'rating', 5, 0.1);
```

### `garbage_collect_uv`
`garbage_collect_uv(source_table name)`
Removes rows in the U and V tables that do not correspond to user or item ids in the source table. For example, if a user deletes their account, their preferences are still saved in the U table. This function removes orphaned rows to save space.
Parameters:
- `source_table` the source table of the model to garbage collect.

Example:
```sql
CALL garbage_collect_uv('ratings');
```

### `train_uv`
`train_uv(source_table name, patience int DEFAULT 4, max_iterations int DEFAULT 8, training_validation_split float DEFAULT 0, quiet boolean DEFAULT false)`
Trains the UV model for the source table whose name is given by the first parameter. This will periodically report training RMSE. The current implementation of `train_uv` requires slightly over `4*((k*k+k)*max(# users, # items))` bytes of memory to function. For example, the model's k hyperparameter is set to 5 and there is 10GB of free memory, Sveddy can train on a maximum of ~80 million users or items.

Parameters:
- `source_table` Indicates the source table of the model which will be trained.
- `patience` If more than this number of training iterations pass without RMSE reaching a new low, training will stop.
- `max_iterations` The maximum number of training iterations.
- `training_validation_split` The (approximate) fraction of entries in the source table which will be used for validation instead of training. If set to a nonzero value, early stopping behavior (set by the `patience` parameter) will respond to validation RMSE instead of training RMSE to avoid overfitting. Also, if `quiet` is false, logs will show both training and validation RMSE.
- `quiet` If set to true, RMSE will not be logged.

Example:
```sql
CALL train_uv('ratings', patience => 6, max_iterations => 16);
```

### `predict_uv`
`predict_uv(user_weights real[], item_weights real[])`
Returns the model's prediction for a user on an item. The `user_weights` argument should come from the row in the U table with the id of the user in question, and similarly the `item_weights` arguments should come from the row in the V table with the id of the item in question.

Example:
```sql
SELECT predict_uv(
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u WHERE id = 3),
    (SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v WHERE id = 5)
);
```

Example (recommend five movies to a user they haven't seen before):
```sql
SELECT items.*, predict_uv(u.weights, v.weights) AS predicted_rating
FROM (
    SELECT id, weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_v
    WHERE NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM ratings 
        WHERE user_id = 3 AND movie_id = ratings_sveddy_model_v.id
    )
) AS v
CROSS JOIN (
    SELECT weights FROM ratings_sveddy_model_u
    WHERE id = 3
) AS u
LEFT JOIN items ON items.id = v.id
ORDER BY predicted_rating DESC
LIMIT 5;
```
